## Welcome to my CS 499 ePortfolio

This portfolio is the culmination of my work in the SNHU Computer Science Program. This ePortfolio is made of a professional self-assessment, code review, and enhancements to work completed earlier during the progress of my degree. Each of the enhancements I made includes a narrative that describes the steps I took to make the changes, challenges I faced, and justification for their inclusion in the portfolio. 

### Professional Self-Assessment
I joined the Computer Science program at SNHU in September of 2018, before starting this degree the only computer science course I had taken was a Microsoft Office class. After graduating with my Bachelors in Physics, I commissioned and entered the Army as a Cyber officer. I realized that having only taken one computer science course, I was not prepared to be successful in my new career field. Fortunately, all of my initial degree credits transferred and I was able to focus only on computer science courses. Throughout this program I have learned to program in multiple languages, how computers work from the hardware up, and how to ensure that computers are protected. This degree has enabled me to showcase my ability to learn quickly and adapt to new requirements. 

This degree program enabled me to show that I am able to work in a team environment through courses like CS-310 which enabled me to work technically in a team environment through EGit. I quickly learned how to ensure that my contributions to the team would integrate well to the work already done and not impact the work that others completed. IT 328 also enabled me to work within a team environment and taught me how to communicate with stakeholders over the course of a project. This class strengthened my ability to communicate with my team through email and enabled me to show my skills communicated project issues and changes. It also enabled me to communicate these issues to stakeholders, these types of communicate require a different skillset. Communicating with team members can involve more technical jargon whereas communicating with stakeholders requires more general language and requires you to get the point across quickly and without causing panic or more concern than required. Working in a team environment also includes understanding project management and ensuring that the schedule created is realistic. I was able to display this skill during IT 328 when I adjusted the production schedule for a project after making changes to the project scope and experiencing an update conflict that would potentially cause unexpected downtime to the system. 

Before starting this Computer Science degree, I had never been introduced to data structures and algorithms, so this was a completely new experience for me. Although the basics of data structures and algorithms was covered in several of the beginner programming class, CS260 enabled me to go in depth and understand the difference between the two and gave me the skills needed to create both. This course helped me prepare for CS340 where I wrote algorithms that enabled the Create, Read, Update, and Delete operations for my database’s interface. 

I also learned about software engineering and design during multiple courses throughout my degree. CS319 allowed me to show my skills when it comes to designing software like cell phone applications.  IT 315 enabled me to showcase my skill with the software engineering because I was able to identify use-cases for a piece of software and determine how the software needed to communicate internally to allow it to work. CS340 allowed me to showcase my skills in engineering and design when I created an interface that worked with a Mongo Database to display information and allowed users to interact with that interface. My work in CS320 gave me the skills necessary to understand iterative testing techniques through the use of JUnit tests. From this course I learned how important it is to continuously test different sections of a program to ensure that once the project is complete all aspects of it work and work together. 

I was able to show my skill and learn about databases through DAD220 where I used a MySQL database to Create, Read, Update, and Delete information. I continued my skills with databases in CS340 where I created Mongo databases and learned how to work on client-side scripting to create a user interface that made it easier for people to interact with the database. 

In CS201 I showcased my understanding of cyber security when I focused the research for my final project on the importance of cyber security. I also was able to showcase my understanding of security during IT 145 where we created an authentication system that only allowed properly authenticated personnel to access information. CS340 is another example of my skills when it comes to security, during this course I created a final project that required authentication to be completed before a user is able to access the data. I ensured that to access the database via the terminal a username and password was required. This project automated the login when the program was running because the username and password was stored, but in future iterations of the project I would create an additional interface that required users to enter their username and password before gaining access to the interface I created in the course. 

My ePortfolio includes specific projects and examples of what I have learned through this degree that led to my abilities with respect to software design and engineering, data structures and algorithms, and databases. The first artifact I chose was my project from CS340 where I created a Mongo database and an interface that enabled users to interact with the database. This artifact was created in February 2021 in Python and using Plotly Dash to create a RESTful API linked with MongoDB to create an interface that allowed users to sort through database information and displayed a map of the top line of data displayed at that time as well as a pie graph of the data on that page, for this artifact specifically it displays a pie graph of the breeds listed. My planned enhancement for this project was to increase the capability of the project by adding the ability for a user to add entries to the database. I was able to get the interface portion of this enhancement working but was not able to get the interface to work with the create operation to add entries to the database. Although I was not completely successful in this endeavor, this planned enhancement and partial execution of that enhancement displayed my ability to implement design solutions to accomplish specific goals. This artifact and enhancement displayed my ability to create industry standard software designs through my updated interface. This enhancement also let me show my skill in using well-founded techniques and tools in computing. If I were to continue working on this project, I would adjust my inputs to do some data validation before allowing a user to create an entry into the database. This can be done initially using the Dash input component to restrict the data type, but data validation can also be done by ensuring that input items have the proper value. This data validation would ensure that no improper entries are recorded into the database, which would preserve the integrity of the database. 

The second artifact I chose for this project was two parts of the CS260 final project, a Linked List program and a Binary Search Tree program. Both of these programs implemented Find and Delete algorithms for the two types of data structures, but neither had a Sort algorithm yet. I chose to add sorting algorithms to both of these programs to showcase my ability to create new algorithms for different types of data structures. By making these enhancements to my already existing programs, I was able to demonstrate the ability to use program solutions to solve logic problems and implement them in software. These enhancements also delivered value in the program and created more robust and efficient code by expanding on the capabilities already provided in the program. I was able to demonstrate my ability to solve logic problems with both data structures and algorithms through these enhancements. 

The final artifact I chose for this project was an excel version of my book collection, which I imported into a Mongo database and then created an interface for. For this portion of the project, I created an interface from the ground up for my database using HTML and JavaScript. Before making this enhancement, I had very minimal experience with HTML and JavaScript and had never created a working interface from the ground up on my own. During CS340 we were provided a lot of the programming framework needed to be successful, so this enhancement displayed my ability to understand and execute best practices when working with databases and software design. This artifact and enhancement also displayed my ability to accomplish specific goals. Although I was not able to integrate security into this enhancement, if I were to continue working on this project in the future, I would add an authentication requirement before someone is able to access the data to ensure only the proper people have access to the system. 

### Code Review

This review was intended to look-over and critique the code I am using to make enhancements on. The code review coveres a few different programs that I have submitted to enhance, and lays out how I plan to make these enhancements throughout CS 499. The code review has three sections: Software Engineering and Design, Data Structures and Algorithms, and Databases. Each of these sections has initial code and planned enhancements associated with them. Please use the link to access and view my [code review](https://youtu.be/3gtrRmnn6po) for this portfolio. 

### Software Design and Engineering

The artifact I chose for the Software Engineering and Design portion of the final project is my Final Project from Computer Science 340. This project created a RESTful API that linked to a Mongo Database. The REST API was created using Python, Jupyter Notebook, and Plotly Dash to create a dashboard to display database information, a pie chart, and location data for the table created from the database information. This project was created between January and February of 2021, and through the course of the project creation I learned about REST APIs and learned how to do client-side scripting for client-server development. This was an area that I hadn’t worked with much before, and the project as designed only reads from the database and doesn’t make use of the rest of the CRUD module created for it. 

This artifact was included in my ePortfolio because it was one of the most difficult projects I worked on during the course of my degree, and it 	shows my ability to create a product that meets a client’s objectives. This artifact was created with the intent of enabling a rescue training company to work with local animal shelters to find animals that meet specific criteria to begin rescue training. This artifact also showed my ability to use innovative skills and techniques for the design solutions. My original artifact is already a good example of this because I show how I moved from using buttons to radio selection items when I realized that the radio items would work better for the requested features. 

I was able to update the software design to include a user entry section, but there is still improvement needed for the logic and troubleshooting to determine why entries are not being added to the database. I have met the objectives I set during the artifact selection and Code Review, but have not achieved all of the goals I had set for myself with this enhancement. I spent a lot of time while working on this enhancement ensuring that my environment was working as required and all the necessary software was downloaded. 

While updating and modifying this artifact I had to modify it to work on the new operating system and update the authentication portion of the CRUD module created to ensure that it was able to successfully access the database. I also modified the naming convention for the CRUD module so that it made more sense with the project than keeping the names used to submit homework. After getting my environment up and running and ensuring the original project was able to run without issues I began making my enhancements. My large planned enhancement for this project was adding a user entry section so that users could add entries to the database to keep this project in continued use. While I was adding this enhancement I learned more about the core components of Plotly Dash, and learned how to add more sections to the interface. I also learned how to use those input components of Plotly Dash, and realized that to enable user entries I would have to use a separate input section for each of the dictionary components and then write those entries into a new dictionary before adding it to the database. I then added some logic for the button, so that the entry would be added if the number of button clicks was greater than a comparison number. After the button clicks n_clicks would increase, and then theoretically it would go through the IF loop I created to add that entry to the database and re-read the whole database to the dataframe being used to display the data. The design of the dashboard has been updated so this new section appears to the user, but I cannot determine why when the Create method is being called the program is not adding the entry to the database. This is a challenge that I still have not been able to overcome, but I am working on looking up resources and re-evaluating the logic I am using to determine where the error is. 

During my updates I also re-evaluated the location data logic, and cannot determine why two of my radio selections only update the pie-chart and not the location data. The pie-chart and the location data follow the same logic to get the data from the viewData being created by the table, so I am not sure why one updates and the other doesn’t. This logic is still being evaluated. I feel confident that given more time I will be able to address the issue with my user entries and gain a better understanding of the location data issue. Although I was not able to get everything working as planned, I made significant improvement to the program and was able to adapt it to a new operating system. 

You can access the original artifact and the updates I made using this [link](https://github.com/AStaxx-1/CS499/tree/main/Software%20Design%20and%20Engineering).

### Data Structures and Algorithms

The artifacts chosen for the Data Structure and Algorithms section of the final project are a Linked List program and a Binary Search Tree program that I created during CS 260. These artifacts were chosen because they came from a course that was based solely on the creation, use, and understanding of data structures and algorithms. These programs show the use of multiple data structures and algorithms specifically tailored to those structures. The programs as artifacts showed by ability to create algorithms to complete tasks for uses and display the results. Each of these artifacts had similar algorithms already including load, search, and delete algorithms that enabled a user to load information from a csv and display it to the screen and then search and delete information. The programs both lacked a sorting algorithm, or a method for which the user to choose to sort their data. 

For the Linked List artifact, the enhancement I made was to add an insertion sort algorithm. When the course first started I proposed a merge sort for this program, but realized that as a singly linked list I could do an insertion sort for the program instead. This insertion sort algorithm sorts the information by Bid Id so that the bids are sorted from lowest to highest bid id when the user chooses the sort option. Also during these enhancements, I ensured that I was adding the necessary comments and removing the fix-me comments I noticed during the code review to really clean up the program. This enhancement showcased my ability to not only return to an old program and understand it in depth but showed my ability to program a solution to solve a logic problem in the program. Initially the program just read in the csv and spit out the few pieces of information we needed. By adding this sorting algorithm I could easily build on it to enable sorting by other portions of the bid, not just the bid Id. The enhancement I added to this program did not meet the specific goal I had in mind for creating a merge sort, but it did meet my goal to have a sorting algorithm added to enhance the usability of the program. Although the enhancement was not exactly what I initially planned, it still met the objective I planned to meet for this part of the final project.

The other program I enhanced was a Binary Search Tree Program. I initially intended to add a sorting algorithm to this program to increase usability and display my skills, but I realized that the sorting algorithm for this program would be less efficient that updating my current algorithms to allow a user to choose how they would like the Binary Search Tree results displayed. After playing around with sending the binary search tree to an array, and then returning the data to a binary search tree I realized it was going to be more efficient to reload the data depending on how the user wanted to display it. To do this I provided more options for the user on their input page, and updated the insert algorithm to reflect. Now the program default loads the information based on the bid id, but provides the user the opportunity to choose between each of the pieces of information displayed for each bid. To do this I adjusted the insert algorithm originally created for the program to have if/if else statements that determine what factor is used to choose the insertion of each bid. Although the way I went about adding this enhancement was different than originally planned, it still displays my ability to solve logic problems using algorithms. It also demonstrated my ability to look at the efficiency of what I have planned and use innovative skills and techniques to solve the problem. I was able to take what I originally planned and understand a better way to implement for this program. I still met the course objectives I originally intended to meet with this enhancement and artifact. 

Throughout the process of enhancing both of these artifacts I continuously took the time to step back and ask myself if what I was doing was efficient and made the most sense. This is a process that I try to implement not just for my programs but my daily life and it paid off through this process because I was able to identify a better and more sound way to achieve my plans for both of these programs. One of the challenges I faced during these enhancements was adjusting my lab environment to be able to work again. Since completing CS260 my laptop has had a couple updates, and one of the updates I made caused Eclipse to not be able to run my programs. There is a compatibility error with Mac and the debugger that Eclipse uses by default, and in the process of keeping my laptop up-to-date I unknowingly caused a compatibility issue that wouldn’t enable my programs to build or debug. I was able to solve this by downloading a more recent version of GDB and create a certificate that enabled the programs to work properly. Throughout the first two milestones I have realized how much more difficult things can be when you aren’t given a lab environment, and it’s made me realize that I need to stay on top of updates and issues that can impact my ability to work on my projects. This was a big lesson for me because most of the classes I was in gave us a working lab environment, so I never had to worry about these things before but now I know what to look for an how to fix several errors. 

You can access the original artifacts and the updated code using this [link](https://github.com/AStaxx-1/CS499/tree/main/Data%20Structures%20and%20Algorithms).

### Databases

The artifact I selected for the Database portion of the final project was an excel version of my book collection that I imported into a MongoDB. This was an incredibly simple artifact that did not have any code created for it before starting this milestone. The final project rubric recommended creating a MongoDB interface from HTML and JavaScript for the enhancement in this milestone, and I have never built and interface like this from scratch. I first created the excel version of my data at the beginning of the course. This artifact was included because I wanted to show my adaptability and innovation when working with databased. I had the opportunity to do something that I thought would be easier, modifying an already working interface to match this data but decided to go with something new and a little more personally challenging to showcase my ability to learn quickly and adjust to new programming languages and requirements. 

This artifact was improved greatly during this enhancement. I started with an excel sheet that had the information for my personal library and imported it into MongoDB to create a new database and collection. Once the database was created, I moved on to creating the interface using Node.js and Express. I built this project from the ground up, and my interface has an initial welcome page and links to the other two pages I build for the interface. The first page lists all the entries in the database and a link to the previous page. The second page provides the user the opportunity to add data to the database from the interface and includes a link to the “book list” page as well as the “welcome” page. All the pages available are completely functional and the links between the pages all work. The enhancements I made to this project showed that I can program solutions for storing and accessing data in a database. If I were to continue working on this project in the future, I would want to add user authentication to make it more secure. I know how to add the security to the database itself but could not quite reach the ability for a user to enter a username and password and move to the next page of the interface. 

I met the initial objects I laid out during the artifact selection while making these enhancements. While I was enhancing this project, I learned a lot about HTML. Before this project I had minimal experience with HTML, but since working on this I have learned a lot and learned that HTML is a lot simpler than I initially believed. Given more time I know that I could create better looking interfaces with more functionality based on my experience with this project. For this project one of the challenges I faced was how to make the interface functional for a user, so I had to think about the things that I expect out of the interfaces I work with. The interface I created was very basic but gets the point across well and is functional enough that a user would be able to walk up and use it. Another challenge I faced was that I was able to add authentication to the database itself but struggling to integrate the code with that authentication. In the end I removed the authentication requirement from the database because it was hindering my ability to connect to the database at all, but it is something that I kept in mind during the project. One of the things I have learned in cybersecurity is the more secure we make a system the more difficult access/use is for an average user, and that is something I encountered when working on this enhancement. Adding the authentication requirement to the database made it more secure, but it also made it harder for me to get the program to connect. 

You can access the original artifacts and code used for this enhancement using this [link](https://github.com/AStaxx-1/CS499/tree/main/Databases).

